Add what's new in v2 page + some additional v2 information (#710)
chocolatey/docs: input/en-us/choco/new-in-v2.md

---
Order: 15
xref: choco-new-in-v2
Title: What's new in Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0
Description: A summary of the notable differences when upgrading from Chocolatey CLI v1.x to v2.0.0.
---

# What's New in Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0

## NuGet v3 Feed Support

You can now use NuGet v3 package feeds with Chocolatey CLI!
This allows users to work with newer package repository solutions that only provide NuGet v3 feeds.
We will be adding NuGet v3 support to the Chocolatey Community Repository in the future.

> Some examples of repositories with NuGet v3 feed support that you can start using with Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shown below are some examples of repository managers that support NuGet v3 feeds, that you can start using with Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later:
```

> Some examples of repositories with NuGet v3 feed support that you can start using with Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shown below are some examples of repository managers that support NuGet v3 feeds, that you can start using with Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later:
```

- [GitLab Package Registry](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/packages/nuget_repository/)
- [ProGet](https://inedo.com/proget)
- [Sonatype Nexus](https://www.sonatype.com/products/sonatype-nexus-repository)
- [JFrog Artifactory](https://jfrog.com/artifactory/)

## SemVer 2.0.0 Support

Starting in v2.0.0, Chocolatey CLI supports SemVer 2.0.0, although it requires that all version number segments fit into the range `0-2147483647`.
This allows some additional prerelease package version variants like `1.0.1-alpha.23` (note the period in the prerelease tag following the hyphen, which was previously considered not valid for a version number) to be built with Chocolatey CLI.
For more information on SemVer 2.0.0, please see [the SemVer website](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

> **Note**
>
> Most older version styles, like 4-part version numbers (`1.0.0.2`), are still supported.
> Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later adopt NuGet's current versioning system.
> Any version numbers supported by NuGet are also supported by Chocolatey CLI.

## Minimum Operating System Support Changes

See our brand-new [Support Lifecycle](xref:support-lifecycle) page for a full run-down.

> **Note**
>

> > To use the Chocolatey Community Repository with Windows Server 2008r2 and 2012, you need to ensure the relevant patches are installed and registry entries configured to enable TLS v1.2 by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To use the Chocolatey Community Repository with Windows Server 2008 R2 and 2012, you need to ensure the relevant patches are installed and registry entries configured to enable TLS v1.2 by default.
```

Author: Fixed

We have now [removed them entirely](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2642).

If you miss that functionality, it is still possible to add these commands back as either batch files on the PATH, or PowerShell functions added to your profile.

## The List Command Only Shows Local Packages

Previously, Chocolatey CLI had three identical commands: `list`, `search`, and `find`.
In v2.0.0, `list` has become the command used for listing locally-installed packages, while `search` and `find` work with remote repositories.
For backwards compatibility, the `-lo` and `--local-only` flags are deprecated, with plans to remove them in Chocolatey CLI v3.0.0.

## Limits On Large Queries

Chocolatey CLI will now impose a limit on the number of packages returned by the `list`, `find`, and `search` commands.
For local sources the limit is **10,000** packages, with remote sources being limited to **1,000**.
The default page size in both cases is **100**. On reaching these limits, Chocolatey CLI will warn you to refine your query to get the results you need.

> ## New Options, Configurations, and Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Added Options, Configurations, and Features
```

Author: Sorted

- `--online` option added for commands' `--help`.
  This will now take you to an online version of the command help.
  For example, `choco install --help --online` will open the [Install command docs page](https://docs.chocolatey.org/en-us/choco/commands/install) in your default browser.
- `choco feature` now supports the `get` subcommand, which will show a single feature state.
- The `defaultPushSource` configuration option was added, which sets a default URL to push to when using `choco push`.

## Removed Options and Features

- Removed the deprecated side-by-side install functionality (aka `--allow-multiple`).
- Removed the deprecated default push location of `push.chocolatey.org`.
  Use the new `defaultPushSource` configuration instead (see above).
- Removed deprecated configuration options for `cacheLocation` and `commandExecutionTimeoutSettings`.
- Only Chocolatey CLI configuration is shown for `choco config list`.
  Use `choco feature list` to view features, and `choco apikey list` to view API key entries.

> - [WebPi has been removed by Microsoft](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2958) and the `--source webpi` package source has been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [WebPi has been removed by Microsoft](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2958) and the `--source webpi` alternative package source has been removed.
```

Author: Added!

---
Order: 15
xref: choco-new-in-v2
Title: What's new in Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0
Description: A summary of the notable differences when upgrading from Chocolatey CLI v1.x to v2.0.0.
---

# What's New in Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0

## NuGet v3 Feed Support

You can now use NuGet v3 package feeds with Chocolatey CLI!

> This allows users to work with newer package repository solutions that only provide NuGet v3 feeds.

Author: Sorted!

- [GitHub Packages](https://github.com/features/packages)
- [GitLab Package Registry](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/packages/nuget_repository/)
- [ProGet](https://inedo.com/proget)
- [Sonatype Nexus](https://www.sonatype.com/products/sonatype-nexus-repository)
- [JFrog Artifactory](https://jfrog.com/artifactory/)

## SemVer 2.0.0 Support

Starting in v2.0.0, Chocolatey CLI supports SemVer 2.0.0, although it requires that all version number segments fit into the range `0-2147483647`.
This allows some additional prerelease package version variants like `1.0.1-alpha.23` (note the period in the prerelease tag following the hyphen, which was previously considered not valid for a version number) to be built with Chocolatey CLI.
For more information on SemVer 2.0.0, please see [the SemVer website](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

> **Note**
>
> Most older version styles, like 4-part version numbers (`1.0.0.2`), are still supported.
> Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 and later adopt NuGet's current versioning system.
> Any version numbers supported by NuGet are also supported by Chocolatey CLI.

## Minimum Operating System Support Changes

> See our brand-new [Support Lifecycle](xref:support-lifecycle) page for a full run-down.

Author: Sorted, ty!

> **Note**
>
> To use the Chocolatey Community Repository with Windows Server 2008 R2 and 2012, you need to ensure the relevant patches are installed and registry entries configured to enable TLS v1.2 by default.

## .NET Framework Uplift

Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0 now requires .NET Framework 4.8.
When possible, the installation process will attempt to install .NET Framework 4.8 if it's not already present on the system.
However, installing .NET Framework 4.8 will require a reboot to be completed before Chocolatey CLI can be installed.

For the smoothest upgrade experience, we recommend you install .NET Framework 4.8 and reboot before installing or upgrading to Chocolatey CLI v2.0.0.

## API Key Subcommands

The `choco apikey` syntax has changed.
The `--remove` option has been removed, and `add` / `remove` / `list` subcommands have been added.
For example:

```powershell
choco apikey add --source "https://source.url/api/v2/" --key "API_KEY_HERE"
choco apikey list

> choco apikey remove --source "https://source.url/api/v2/"

Author: This suggestion also isn't following the best practices guide... and tbh we _really_ need to overhaul that and evaluate whether all of that is relevant or wise. Single quotes and double quotes have very specific meanings in PowerShell and our recommendations there don't really account of that well at all.

That's a rant for another day tho. :>

> choco apikey remove --source "https://source.url/api/v2/"

Reviewer: You're absolutely right. I updated later code to follow it, but didn't come back to this. Apologies. It should have been:

```
choco apikey add --source="'https://source.url/api/v2/'" --key="'API_KEY_HERE'"
choco apikey list
choco apikey remove --source="'https://source.url/api/v2/'"
```

> choco apikey remove --source "https://source.url/api/v2/"

Author: So many quotes 😭 

I think I have this all updated tho, ty!

---
Order: 15
xref: choco-new-in-v2
Title: What's new in Chocolatey v2
Description: A summary of the notable differences when upgrading from Chocolatey v1 to v2.
---

# What's new in Chocolatey v2

## NuGet v3 feed support

You can now use NuGet v3 package feeds with Chocolatey!
This allows users to work with newer package repository solutions that only provide v3 NuGet feeds, and also opens the door to adding NuGet v3 feeds to our own package repositories at some point in the future.

Some examples of repositories with NuGet v3 feed support that you can start using with Chocolatey v2:

- [GitHub Packages](https://github.com/features/packages)
- [ProGet](https://inedo.com/proget)
- [Sonatype Nexus](https://www.sonatype.com/products/sonatype-nexus-repository)

## SemVer 2.0.0 support

Starting in v2.0, Chocolatey supports SemVer 2.0.0.
This allows some additional prerelease package version variants like `1.0.1-alpha.23` (note the period in the prerelease tag following the hyphen, which was previously considered not valid for a version number) to be built with Chocolatey.

> For more information on SemVer 2.0.0, please see [the SemVer website](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

Reviewer 2: Chocolatey v2 does not follow SemVer exactly. A couple of examples are that elements are limited to int32 length, that a fourth element is allowed in the version, and that build metadata is allowed in the nuspec version but ignored otherwise. 
Maybe https://github.com/chocolatey/docs/issues/375 could be completed?

Author: Mmm true, but the wording is "supports", not "requires", so having a few things in addition to what semver allows is fine... I will add a note that version parts are limited to int32.MaxValue though.

I agree it would be good to get #375 done itself, I don't think this doc is quite the right place for all those details atm.

Author: I've rephrased this a bit and added a note that this doesn't mean we're no longer supporting older version styles just yet.

Reviewer 2: It looks great now.

Although we know not _all_ of these conflict with other well-known programs' executable names, we chose to remove them all.
This was partly to limit unnecessary cluttering of the PATH, so that we have a lower likelihood of running into that same problem in future.
We also believe it is much less confusing to remove all of them than it would be to remove a subset of them and leave folks having to guess or check which shims happen to remain.

For the folks who are accustomed to using them, it's still possible to define these as either batch files you manually place on your PATH, or PowerShell functions you add to your profile.
However, they will not be provided by Chocolatey any longer.

## `choco list` only lists local packages

Previously, Chocolatey CLI had three identical commands: `list`, `search`, and `find`.
In v2.0, `list` has become the command used for listing locally-installed packages, while `search` and `find` target remote repositories.
For backwards compatibility, the `-lo` and `--local-only` flags are deprecated rather than removed for `list`.
We plan to remove `--local-only` for `list` in v3.0.

## Large query limits

> If a query that may return a large number of packages is given, Chocolatey CLI will now impose a default limit on the number of packages returned.

Reviewer 2: It might be good to explicitly note what commands this applies for.

Author: Added a note for the affected commands, cheers :3

- :sparkles: `choco feature` now supports the `get` subcommand, which will output the state of a single requested feature.
- :sparkles: The `defaultPushSource` configuration option was added, which sets a default URL to push to when using `choco push`.

## Other deprecated / removed options and features

- Deprecated side-by-side install functionality (aka `--allow-multiple`) has been removed.
- The deprecated default push location of `push.chocolatey.org` has been removed.
  Use the new `defaultPushSource` configuration instead (see below).
- Deprecated configuration options for `cacheLocation` and `commandExecutionTimeoutSettings` were removed.
- `choco config list` no longer shows anything other than configuration values.
  Use `choco feature list` to view features, and `choco apikey list` to view API key entries.
- The `--source webpi` package source has been removed.
- Installing directly from a `nupkg` or `nuspec` file is no longer supported.
  Use `choco install packagename -s ./local/path/to/folder` instead, and ensure packages are packed with `choco pack` before attempting to install them.

> - Package version numbers which contain leading zeroes for parts of the version number (for example: `9.00.01`) are no longer permitted.

Reviewer 2: It probably would be better to just say that they will be normalized, instead of being not permitted. Since `.nuspec`s can still have leading zeros, they just automatically get normalized during pack.

Author: I've rephrased this a bit, thanks!

---
Order: 15
xref: choco-new-in-v2
Title: What's new in Chocolatey v2
Description: A summary of the notable differences when upgrading from Chocolatey v1 to v2.
---

# What's new in Chocolatey v2

> ## NuGet v3 feed support

Author: Fixed

> You can now use NuGet v3 package feeds with Chocolatey!

Author: Added

> This allows users to work with newer package repository solutions that only provide v3 NuGet feeds, and also opens the door to adding NuGet v3 feeds to our own package repositories at some point in the future.

Author: Added

> Some examples of repositories with NuGet v3 feed support that you can start using with Chocolatey v2:

Author: Added

- [GitHub Packages](https://github.com/features/packages)
- [ProGet](https://inedo.com/proget)
- [Sonatype Nexus](https://www.sonatype.com/products/sonatype-nexus-repository)

> 

Author: Looks like GItLab is Nuget v3 as well, added links for these.

> ## SemVer 2.0.0 support

Author: Fixed

> Starting in v2.0, Chocolatey supports SemVer 2.0.0, although it requires that all version parts fit into the range `0-2147483647`.

Author: Amended, cheers :3

> This allows some additional prerelease package version variants like `1.0.1-alpha.23` (note the period in the prerelease tag following the hyphen, which was previously considered not valid for a version number) to be built with Chocolatey.

Author: Added

For more information on SemVer 2.0.0, please see [the SemVer website](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

> **Note**
>
> Most older version styles, like 4-part version numbers (`1.0.0.2`), are still supported.

> > Chocolatey v2 is adopting NuGet's current versioning system, so any version numbers supported by NuGet are also supported by Chocolatey.

Author: Added!

> ## Minimum operating system support changes

Author: Fixed

See our brand-new [Support Lifecycle](xref:support-lifecycle) page for a full run-down.
The short version is:

- Windows Server versions 2008r2, 2012, 2012r2, 2016, 2019, and 2022 are supported

> - Windows Client versions 10 and 11 are supported

Author: Done!

> **Note**
>

> > On Server 2008r2 and 2012, you will need to ensure the relevant patches are installed and registry entries configured to enable TLS v1.2 by default in order to interact with the Chocolatey Community Repository.

Author: Sorted

> ## .NET Framework uplift

Author: Fixed

Chocolatey v2.0 now requires .NET Framework 4.8.
When possible, the installation process will attempt to install the framework if it's not already present on the system.

> However, installing .NET Framework 4.8 will require a reboot to be completed before Chocolatey can be installed.

Author: Updated

> For the smoothest upgrade experience, we recommend you install .NET Framework 4.8 and reboot before installing or upgrading to Chocolatey v2.0.

Author: Added

> ## `choco apikey` subcommands

Author: Updated

> In v2.0, the `choco apikey` syntax has changed.

Author: Sorted

The `--remove` option has been itself removed and replaced by the usage of `add` / `remove` / `list` subcommands.
For example:

```powershell
choco apikey add -s https://source.url/api/v2/ -k API_KEY_HERE
choco apikey list

> choco apikey remove -s https://source.url/api/v2/

Author: 😩 Fair. I know it's our standard and exists for a reason but there are _so many_ things I dislike about many parts of it. I'll fix it though. 😅

> choco apikey remove -s https://source.url/api/v2/

Author: Fixed!

```

For backwards compatibility, omitting the subcommand retains its original behaviour:

- `choco apikey` with no arguments defaults to `list`, listing stored API keys

> - `choco apikey -s https://source.url/api/v2/ -k API_KEY_HERE` with both arguments defaults to `add`, adding a new API key

Author: Added

> ## Shims for `cpack`, `cinst`, `cpush`, `cuninst`, `cup`, and `chocolatey` removed

Author: Hmm. I agree, but I think we need to be slightly more clear here. "Shim Removal" makes it sound like we're ditching shimgen entirely, so I'll put it as "Builtin Shims Removed" to be a little clearer, I think...

Since before v1 of Chocolatey, shortcut shims were provided for commands like `choco pack` (`cpack`) and `choco install` (`cinst`), as well as the longer `chocolatey` shim.
[This has made a lot of people very angry](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/89) and been widely regarded as a bad move.

> As a result, we [deprecated these shims in v1.0](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2641), and now in v2.0 [they have been removed](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2642).

Author: :( hey I liked that reference 😂

> As a result, we [deprecated these shims in v1.0](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2641), and now in v2.0 [they have been removed](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2642).

Author: Fixed :)

Although we know not _all_ of these conflict with other well-known programs' executable names, we chose to remove them all.
This was partly to limit unnecessary cluttering of the PATH, so that we have a lower likelihood of running into that same problem in future.
We also believe it is much less confusing to remove all of them than it would be to remove a subset of them and leave folks having to guess or check which shims happen to remain.

> 

Author: Removed

> For the folks who are accustomed to using them, it's still possible to define these as either batch files you manually place on your PATH, or PowerShell functions you add to your profile.

Author: Fixed

> However, they will not be provided by Chocolatey any longer.

Author: Removed

> ## `choco list` only lists local packages

Author: Updated

Previously, Chocolatey CLI had three identical commands: `list`, `search`, and `find`.

> In v2.0, `list` has become the command used for listing locally-installed packages, while `search` and `find` target remote repositories.

Author: Sorted

For backwards compatibility, the `-lo` and `--local-only` flags are deprecated rather than removed for `list`.

> We plan to remove `--local-only` for `list` in v3.0.

Author: That's a lot of commas, I might cut down on those a little. But fixed :3

## Large query limits

For the `list`, `find`, and `search` commands, when a query that may return a large number of packages is given, Chocolatey CLI will now impose a default limit on the number of packages returned.
The default maximum page size is **100**, and the upper limit for the total packages to be returned from a remote source is **1,000** (the limit is **10,000** for local sources).

> On hitting these limits, you will be prompted to refine your query in order to find what you're looking for.

Reviewer: Does Chocolatey CLI 'warn' you?

> ## Other new options and features
> 
> - :sparkles: `--online` option added for commands' `--help`.
>   Specifying this option will open your default browser to the relevant docs page for the command.
>   For example, `choco install --help --online` will open the [Install command docs page](https://docs.chocolatey.org/en-us/choco/commands/install) in your default browser.
> - :sparkles: `choco feature` now supports the `get` subcommand, which will output the state of a single requested feature.
> - :sparkles: The `defaultPushSource` configuration option was added, which sets a default URL to push to when using `choco push`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## New Options, Configurations and Features

- `--online` option added for commands' `--help`. This will now take you to an online version of the command help.
  For example, `choco install --help --online` will open the [Install command docs page](https://docs.chocolatey.org/en-us/choco/commands/install) in your default browser.
- `choco feature` now supports the `get` subcommand, which will show a single feature state.
- The `defaultPushSource` allows you to sets a default URL to push to when using `choco push`. By default this is set to `https://push.chocolatey.org` but will change in v3.0.0.
```

Reviewer: @gep13, the last statement about `defaultPushSource` default changing in v3.0.0 is correct and as we discussed?

Author: I believe that was the original plan. During conversations when this was being implemented, though, we realised we had already deprecated the default push source way back in the v1.0 release. If I recall correctly, I think the decision we came to and implemented was as I originally stated here -- there is no default push source set in v2.0 as it was already deprecated in v1.0.

I'll leave that last one off till Gary confirms one way or the other and fix up the rest here. 👍

Author: Hmm... Had a look, the page for creating packages suggests using an explicit source already, it doesn't rely on the implicit default thankfully. I'll add an additional note there that folks can add the new config value to set a default and add it to this PR.

Author: Added a commit for this.

> ## Other deprecated / removed options and features
> 
> - Deprecated side-by-side install functionality (aka `--allow-multiple`) has been removed.
> - The deprecated default push location of `push.chocolatey.org` has been removed.
>   Use the new `defaultPushSource` configuration instead (see below).
> - Deprecated configuration options for `cacheLocation` and `commandExecutionTimeoutSettings` were removed.
> - `choco config list` no longer shows anything other than configuration values.
>   Use `choco feature list` to view features, and `choco apikey list` to view API key entries.
> - The `--source webpi` package source has been removed.
> - Installing directly from a `nupkg` or `nuspec` file is no longer supported.
>   Use `choco install packagename -s ./local/path/to/folder` instead, and ensure packages are packed with `choco pack` before attempting to install them.
> - Package version numbers will no longer retain leading zeroes in any parts of the version number when using `choco pack`.
>   For example, `09.00.001` will be normalized to `9.0.1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Removed Options and Features

- Removed the deprecated side-by-side install functionality (aka `--allow-multiple`).
- Removed the deprecated default push location of `push.chocolatey.org`.
  Use the new `defaultPushSource` configuration instead (see above).
- Removed the deprecated configuration options for `cacheLocation` and `commandExecutionTimeoutSettings`.
- Only Chocolatey CLI configuration is shown for the `choco config list`.
  Use `choco feature list` to view features, and `choco apikey list` to view API key entries.
- [WebPi has been removed by Microsoft](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/issues/2958) and the `--source webpi` alternative source has been removed from Chocolatey CLI.
- Removed installing directly from a `nupkg` or `nuspec` file.
  Use `choco install packagename -s ./local/path/to/folder` instead, and ensure packages are packed with `choco pack` before attempting to install them.
- Package version numbers will no longer retain leading zeroes in any parts of the version number when using `choco pack`.
  For example, `09.00.001` will be normalized to `9.0.1`.
```

Reviewer: @gep13 leaving this comment here as depending on your answers to the comment above, the second one on this list may need to be changed.
